This paragraph is taken from Daniel Hemel’s “ ‘A New Birth of Freedom’: The Evolution of Lincoln’s Views on Race” (from Exposé 2003-04, p. 36, Harvard’s journal of student writing)

>Shortly after Abraham Lincoln's death in 1865, Frederick Douglass  called Lincoln "emphatically the black mans [sic] President: the first  to show any respect for their rights as men." Years later, Douglass, a prominent newspaper editor and himself an ex-slave, said, "In all my interviews with Lincoln I was impressed with his entire freedom from prejudice against the colored race" (qtd. in Gienapp, Biography 199, 227). Indeed, Lincoln always opposed slavery. When Lincoln was seven years old, his family left Kentucky for Indiana; one reason for the relocation may have been that Lincoln's father did not want to raise his children in a slave state. Young Abraham grew up a member of the Mount Separate Church, which broke away from the Baptist Convention to protest the denomination's acceptance of slavery (Gienapp, Biography 2-3). And as Lincoln wrote in a letter to Albert G. Hodges, a Frankfort, Kentucky, lawyer, in 1864: "If slavery is not wrong, nothing is wrong. I can not remember when I did not so think and feel" (Lincoln, Trial 194). However, statements made by Lincoln during his 1858 Senate campaign suggest that the future president was hardly an egalitarian. While Lincoln did not want to see blacks in bondage, he also did not want to extend to them the full benefits of citizenship. "I am not nor ever have been in favor of bringing about in any way the social and political equality of the white and black races," Lincoln said in a debate against the incumbent Stephen A. Douglas at Charleston, Illinois (Trial 57). Rather than being "free from prejudice against the colored race," Lincoln was in fact a vocal white supremacist. "[Tlhere is a physical difference between the white and black races which I believe will for ever forbid the two races living together on terms of social and political equality," he told the Charleston crowd. "And inasmuch as they cannot so live, while they do remain together there must be the position of superior and inferior, and I as much as any other man am in favor of having the superior position assigned to the white race." These two portraits of Lincoln-the one drawn by Frederick Douglass, the other created by Lincoln's own statements-are so diametrically opposed as to seem virtually irreconcilable.



